The Energy Department says it will resume production of tritium, an increasingly scarce gas needed to make nuclear warheads, in fall 1990 despite urgings by environmental groups for a further delay.
The first of three tritium-producing reactors at the department's Savannah River complex near Aiken, S.C., will begin low-power testing late next summer, and production is expected to start between October and December 1990, Energy Secretary James D. Watkins said Thursday after briefing White House officials on the plan.
Watkins said precise dates for the restart schedule will not be set before next April after department officials review progress in a broad management and mechanical overhaul under way at Savannah River since last fall.
The three active reactors at Savannah River _ designated K, L and P _ are the nation's only source of tritium, a manmade hydrogen isotope used to boost the destructive power of nuclear weapons.
All three have been out of operation since spring 1988.
Environmental groups criticized the announcement, saying it means the reactors will be back in operation before all safety questions are answered.
The Energy Department is certainly not putting safety first restart is still No. 1,'' said Brian Costner, director of the Energy Research Foundation, a Columbia, S.C.-based group that wants the reactors closed down permanently.
Costner's organization joined the environmental groups Greenpeace and Natural Resources Defense Council in suing the Energy Department in December to force Watkins to complete an environmental impact statement before restarting the reactors.
Costner said in a telephone interview that the suit will proceed.
Watkins said he had briefed the National Security Council on the plan prepared by Westinghouse Savannah River Co., which operates the reactors under a government contract.
There are still uncertainties'' about getting the reactors running again on the proposed schedule, Watkins said, so a precise restart timetable isn't ready. He didn't identify the remaining problems, but Westinghouse has said it is undertaking a wide-ranging program of safety improvements.
J.L. Gallagher, the Westinghouse manager in charge of the restart effort, told an Energy Department advisory group Wednesday the company was committed to safe operations with a ``balanced, experienced mixture of people'' on the job.
Westinghouse took over management of the site in April from E.I. du Pont de Nemours Co., which had run the plant since it was built in the early 1950s.
Watkins has faced some congressional pressure to further study the environmental implications of restarting the Savannah River reactors, but he also is under pressure from the Pentagon to resume production of tritium before existing stockpiles run so low that weapons systems must be cannibalized.
Tritium decays at a rate of 5.5 percent annually and thus must be regularly replenished to keep the U.S. nuclear arsenal in a state of full readiness.
The deficit in the broadest measure of U.S.trade widened sharply in the first three months of the year as an improvement in the sale of American merchandise was swamped by a deterioration in the country's investment balance sheet, the government reported Tuesday.
The Commerce Department said the deficit in the current account, which had fallen for two consecutive quarters, jumped 7 percent.
Analysts viewed the setback as disturbing evidence of how severe America's trading problems are.
Meanwhile, the government also reported Tuesday that retail sales, held back by weak auto and department store sales, rose a slim 0.1 percent in May.
The current account, also known as the balance of payments, is the most important trade statistic because it measures not only trade in merchandise but also transactions in services, primarily investment flows between countries.
For the first three months of the year, the merchandise portion of the deficit showed a marked improvement, narrowing by 13.7 percent to $27.63 billion, the smallest deficit for merchandise trade in four years.
That improvement was offset, however, by a steep drop in the services category, which fell to a tiny surplus of $369 million from a surplus of $8.36 billion in the fourth quarter of 1988.
Most of the first quarter decline was blamed on the rising value of the dollar, which lowers the profits of U.S. companies operating overseas because their foreign earnings buy less when they are changed back into dollars.
Beyond the currency movements, analysts said the trade report was disturbing because it reflected the fact that America, once the world's largest creditor nation, is now its largest debtor.
Simply put, that means foreigners now own more in investments in the United States than Americans hold in overseas investments. 
The total excess of foreign holdings is estimated to have risen above $500 billion last year although the government's official accounting of the U.S. net debtor status will not be released until June 29.
Many economists believe America's standard of living will deteriorate in coming years as the country is forced to transfer more and more of its wealth into foreign hands to service its foreign debt.
The current account reflects how much we have to continue to borrow, said Allen Sinai, chief economist of the Boston Co. ``Here we are doing so much better on our merchandise exports, but we are still hurting because of our increasing debtor status.
Cynthia Latta, senior economist at Data Resources Inc., said she believed a decline in living standards could already be seen in the weak growth over the last few years in personal incomes after adjusting for inflation.
We are already starting to feel the effects of the consumption binge the country has been on, she said.At some point we have to slow our consumption'' by saving more and thus lessening the need to import foreign capital.
The current account provides a measure of the amount of money this country must raise abroad to finance its economy.
At the start of this decade, the United States was running surpluses in its current account because earnings from American investments abroad were enough to offset perennial deficits in merchandise trade.
But as Americans transferred billions of dollars into foreign hands to pay for imported cars and televisions, the investment cushion shrank rapidly and disappeared altogether in 1985, when America became a net debtor for the first time in 71 years.
Jacques Marsal, who discovered the famed prehistoric paintings of the Lascaux cave with three young friends in 1940 and became the cave's guardian for life, has died. He was 63.
Marsal died Saturday in a Bordeaux hospital after a long illness, his family said. The cause of death was not disclosed.
On Sept. 12, 1940, the 14-year-old Marsal was playing in an oak forest outside the village of Lascaux, along with a neighbor and two 12-year-old Parisians who had fled to the region 300 miles south of Paris at the outbreak of World War II.
Their dog disappeared into a hole and began barking furiously, and the boys attached Marsal's neighbor to a rope and lowered him down.
The other boys were skeptical and they returned the next day to explore. They found a vast cave whose walls were decorated with colorful paintings of leaping stags, buffalo and prehistoric horses.
Archaeologists determined the paintings dated from about 14,000 B.C. The artwork drew visitors from around the world until 1963, when it was determined that carbon dioxide in their breath was harming the paintings.
Marsal was a guide at the cave when it was open to the public, and he became its guardian after it closed.

